---
title: New York – National “hotbed” of basketball
---
A hotbed is defined as the place that produces disproportionate “Everest-size amounts” of talent by Daniel Coyle in The Talent Code. It is an environment prompts the growth of something (Schultz, 2017a).  New York city is such a place. "There were decisions made by the government and the parks and recreation department to provide a resource for people to play," says Bobbito Garcia, the co-director of the New York City playground basketball documentary "Doin' It In The Park: Pick-Up Basketball NYC" (Garcia, 2013). In the city, there are more than 700 outdoor courts, which are composed of half-moon hoops, double rims and chain-linked fences. They are basketball courts without referees, coaches and professionalism so that everyone can pick up the ball and play no matter who they are and where they from. 
Rucker Park is one of these courts that located in Harlem and it was named after Holcombe Rucker, a local teacher and a playground director for the New York City Department of Parks and Recreation. In 1950, a basketball tournament was found by him in order to help youth in poverty to satisfy their school dreams (Nelson, 2013). In the tournament, outstanding performances of the players shock the crowd and rose a basketball hit in New York. More and more talented youths came to the city to show their gifts. This made New York a hotbed for basketball in the 60s and 70s. Today, basketball has been a national sport and broadcasted for decades, New York is no longer the only hotbed. California has become the state that produces most basketball players because of its large population and the effects of role model such as Kobe Bryant and Stephen Curry.

### References： 

Lapchick, R., Guiao, A. (July 1, 2015). "The 2015 Racial and Gender Report Card: National Basketball Association"[Article]. Retrieved May 17, 2017

Schultz, J. (2017a). Sport and the
sociological imagination [PowerPoint slides]. Retrieved from https://cms.psu.edu/

Garcia, G. (Director). (2013, May 3). Doin' It In The Park [Video file]. Retrieved May 17, 2017, from https://youtu.be/dy6vq0Pt8cc

Nelson, M. R. (2013). American sports: a history of icons, idols, and ideas. Santa Barbara, CA: Greenwood.
