---
title: Introduction
---



Basketball, one of the de facto national sports, which means that it’s considered important to the nation’s culture though not established by law, has existed for more than a century (Schultz, 2017). The original game was invented in 1891 in Springfield by James Naismith and had very different rules than the game we know today. The sport has grown from a recreational YMCA game to an international competitive sport. It was cold in Massachusetts and people wanted a game that they could play indoor. Naismith was asked to invent such sport in 14 days and he also wanted to develop a sport that is easy to play by his class. He adapted the idea from soccer and football and then invented basketball (Wolff, 1991). 

Due to the simple equipment requirements and easily understood rules, basketball has become popular quickly. Today, it has become one of the most popular sports in the world and the NBA has become one of the major sports leagues in the US. According to the consulting firm A.T. Kearney, the NBA constituted about 6% of the global sports market in terms of revenue produced in 2009 with 2.7 billion Euros (Martin, 2014). As a Chinese, I personally spend more time on watching the NBA instead of watching “the Chinese ball”, table tennis, which can emphasize the popularity of the basketball. 

The NBA is recognized by FIBA, the national governing body for basketball in the US. It is the organization that set the international basketball rules, regulates the equipment and facilities and other important factors on the basketball courts by using critical sensibility (“How does it work”, n.d.). Critical sensibility is about being skeptical, and being engaging in systematic doubt (Schultz, 2017). This sensibility is essential for the FIBA in order to maintain the equity and consistency of the basketball court. It will be used frequently in my following part of the project. Historical sensibility, a sensibility about sensing the change of the sport over time, will also be used frequently because of the long and diverse history of basketball (Schultz, 2017). 


###  Reference:

Wolff, A. (1991). _Sports illustrated 100 years of hoops_. New York, NY: Crescent Books. 

Martin, J. (2014). _Could basketball even become the most popular sport in the world_. Retrieved from http://bleacherreport.com/articles/2178053-could-basketball-ever-become-the-most-popular-sport-in-the-world

_“How does it work?_” (n.d.) Retrieved from http://www.fiba.com/calendar2017

Schultz, J. (2017a). _Sport and the
sociological imagination_ [PowerPoint slides]. Retrieved from https://cms.psu.edu/






