---
title: "Module II：sport and social identities"
---

Social identity is a person’s sense of who they are bases on their group memberships (Tajfei, 2004). For example, I consider myself an Asian because of I was born in China and studying abroad won’t change my racial identity. I also consider myself a heterosexual woman both biologically and socially. Different groups of people can identify themselves in various ways and different identities always bring misunderstandings and discriminations. In this part of my project, I will talk about race, gender and sexuality.

Homophobia, a word commonly used by general public, means “fear and hatred directed at those involved in same-sex relationships”. Although homophobia is widely used, the lecture also states that since “phobia” is more of a psychological reaction rather than a social phenomenon. In response, some people consider heterosexism a better word to describe the phenomenon (Schultz, 2017). Even though people have been fighting for equity for LGBT group worldwide and some states in America have granted that lesbian and gay citizens have the right to get married, heterosexism is still the touchiest issue in the world of sports. Not enough people take gay and lesbian athletes seriously. Once "out of the closet" their superior talent and skill becomes meaningless. As well, the athlete becomes prone to criticism , ridicule and cruel jokes.

In 2003, the general public was overwhelmed by Tracy McGrady’s assertion that five percent of the NBA players were gay based on the evidence he saw in the locker room and T-mac refused to make any further responses after the interview (Schmitz, 2003). As one can tell, athletes are forced to stay silent so that they can get away from troubles. Heterosexism truly affects athletes’ personal lives and professional careers. In 2007, John Amaechi is the first professional basketball player to announce his sexuality in public. During his career, though he didn't declare his identity in public, he didn’t deny and hide his identity as gay neither. In response, people who were aware of his sexuality treated him unfair. He blamed his trade to Houston Rockets on Larry Miller and Jerry Sloan, the owner and the head coach of Utah Jazz. Although Amaechi was treated badly in America, the United Kingdom considered him as a hero and hired him as a special commentator (Sheridan, 2007).  In 2013, John Collins came out as the first homosexual player who was still active in the NBA. He was greeted and supported by his teammates, other famous players such as Kobe Bryant, Kevin Durant and Tony Parker and former commissioner David Stern. However, with all these greetings, he wasn't offered any contracts when he was a free agent and after a short season with Brooklyn Nets, he decided to retire (Beck, Branch, 2013).

Today, even though the general public is becoming more aware of the importance of LGBT’s equity, there are still manifestations of heterosexism in the league like using verbal assaults on gay athletes and coaches (Schultz, 2017). In 2015, Bill Kennedy, a referee has worked for 18 years, was irritated by Sacramento King’s guard Rajon Rondo and declared his identity as gay. On December 3, Bill ejected Rondo because of four consecutive technical fouls in the game. Rondo couldn't control his emotion and abused Bill with homophobic slurs. After series of investigations, Rondo was ultimately suspended and fined with $86,300. He was the third player, who was punished by the authority because of heterosexism expression in the NBA (Gibbs, 2015). These crude and rude comments by members in the media are a reminder of the negativity in society. It is a reflection of people's ignorance, stubbornness and hatred for others.

If we say heterosexism is still an issue that we need to solve, then racism can be considered as an issue that we’ve already made a huge progress on, though it had been a rough time for colored population in sports before the late 20th century.

“Separate but equal” was a doctrine confirmed by the Supreme Court in 1896, which allowed segregation and restricted the civil rights and equities of African Americans. Back then, people, mostly whites, believed that whites and blacks were treated equally but separately. The truth was that African Americans were given separate bathrooms, drinking fountains, public transportations and a variety of other segregated areas in daily life. The doctrine was not overruled until the late of 20th century after a long process (Rothman, 2016). The segregation had large effects on basketball, too. According to Mark Johnson, a professional basketball player Andrew Johnson’s son, after the NBA was formed, blacks were not allowed to rent any arenas and only four black players were in the league in 1950. The black plays were not allowed to score initially and the first scores were from Elgin Baylor and Oscar Robinson, who came along in early 60s (Mark, 2009). In 1950s, the NBA was still dominated by whites until a few black players started to show their talents on the court. Wilt Chamberlain came into the league in 1960 and this seven-feet tall young men made the authority and fans exploded. He made the authority to change the rules since the original rules could not stop him. Wilt let owners and business man who overlooked the black players to realize that African Americans could play a much better game than the whites (Bock, 2007).  

Today, The NBA is the most influencing men’s professional basketball league in the world and the percent of players in this league who are considered as African-Americans is about 75 percent (Lapchick,2015).  Not only in basketball, other major sports leagues are also dominated by African-Americans. The segregation phrase has never die out, for example, the arguments like “white men can’t jump” starts to be seen on media. People will always segregate athletes by their skin color on the basis of their skills. But this time, the dominant ideology is not about race itself any more, but about the individuals’ performances.

The exclusion of women in sports goes back to ancient Greece more than 2500 years ago.  Women have been fighting for respect in the sports for a long time. Women have made great titles in sports such as basketball, hockey and soccer (Gibson, 2016). However, they are still overlooked. According to the result I did in topic 10 by using EDEA system, women’s teams are not funded equally as men’s teams not only in basketball but many other major sports. Also, because of the low salaries, women athletes are discouraged to enter the professional league (Schultz,2017). Not even five percent of television sports contain women’s events (Good, 2015). Stereotypes of females in sports are also present because women in sports have often said that their involvement in sports led others to believe that they were lesbian. In dominant ideology, women sports are always less interesting than men sports. According to the social identity of women, they should take care of their families and pay more attention on their appearances because they are physically unsuited for intensive movements. The women, who are involved in sports are considered unattractive and unfeminine (Schultz, 2017). To me, watching LeBron James is more exciting than watching Candace Parker, a professional basketball player who currently players for Los Angeles Sparks in the WNBA, even though they are both top players in basketball.









Reference:

Tajfel, H., & Turner, J. C. (2004). _The Social Identity Theory of Intergroup Behavior, xiii_. 497.

Schultz, J. (2017). Sex, Gender, Sexuality and Discrimination [PowerPoint slides]. Retrieved from https://cms.psu.edu/

 Brian, S. (2003). When T-mac Talks, People Listen. Retrieved from http://articles.orlandosentinel.com/2003-09-13/sports/0309130444_1_mcgrady-schulz-juwan-howard

Chris, S. (2007). Amaechi becomes first NBA player to come out. Retrieved from http://www.espn.com/nba/news/story?id=2757105

Howard, B., John, B.. (2013). With the Words ‘I’m Gay,’ an NBA Center Breaks a Barrier. Retrieved from http://www.nytimes.com/2013/04/30/sports/basketball/nba-center-jason-collins-comes-out-as-gay.html?_r=0

Linsay, G. (2014). NBA Referee Comes Out as Gay, Alleges Star Player Hurled Homophobic Slurs at Him. Retrieved from https://thinkprogress.org/nba-referee-comes-out-as-gay-alleges-star-player-hurled-homophobic-slurs-at-him-13b63a0781b2

Lily, R. (2016). _The Long Death of the ‘Separate but Equal’ Doctrine._ Retrieved from http://time.com/4326692/plessy-ferguson-history-120/

Johnson, M., Lewis, T. (2009). _Basketball Slave: the Andy Johnson Harlem Globetrotter/ NBA Story._ Mantua, NJ.

Hal, B. (2007). More than a Big Man, Wilt Was a Giant. Retrieved from http://static.espn.go.com/nba/news/1999/1012/110885.html

Lapchick, R., Guiao, A (2015). The 2015 Racial and Gender Report Card: National Basketball Association. Retrieved from http://nebula.wsimg.com/6e1489cc3560e1e1a2fa88e3030f5149?AccessKeyId=DAC3A56D8FB782449D2A&disposition=0&alloworigin=1.

Lydialyle, G. (2016). _The Elephant in the Room: Sports and Sexism._ Retrieved from http://harvardmagazine.com/2016/11/harvard-panel-on-sexism-and-womens-sports .

Andrew, G. (2015). When it Comes to Women in Sports, TV News Tunes Out. Retrieved from https://news.usc.edu/82382/when-it-comes-to-women-in-sports-tv-news-tunes-out/
